=== SOURCE: power_energy_monitoring.pdf ===
=== PAGES: 3 ===


--- PAGE 1 ---
Power Register
Current Register
I2C-, SMBus-,
PMBus
Compatible 
Interface
Voltage Register
GND
VBUS
ADC
V
I
A0
A1
ALERT
SDA
SCL
C
0.1 µF
BYPASS
High-Side 
Shunt
Low-Side 
Shunt
Load
Alert 
Registers
VS
Supply Voltage
(2.7 V to 5.5 V)
Bus Voltage
(0 V to 36 V)
IN-
Power 
Accumulator
Copyright © 2017, Texas Instruments Incorporated
INA233
IN+
u
Power
Bus Voltage
Current
Calibration
Shunt Voltage
Shunt Voltage 
Channel
Bus Voltage 
Channel
24-bit
Power Accumulator
16-bit
ADC
1
SBOA194–April 2017
Submit Documentation Feedback
Copyright © 2017, Texas Instruments Incorporated
Power and Energy Monitoring with Digital Current Sensors Dennis Hudgins
____________________________________________________
Power and Energy Monitoring With Digital Current 
Sensors
Dennis Hudgins
As the demand for power efficient systems continues
to grow, accurately monitoring system power and
energy consumption is increasingly important and is a
problem more engineers must solve. One solution to
this problem is to use an analog to digital converter
(ADC) for both the current and voltage and then
multiply the result in a processor to obtain power.
However, the communications delay and overhead
between getting the current and voltage information
introduces time alignment errors in the power
measurement since both the current and the voltage
can be varying independently of each other. To
minimize the delay between the voltage and current
measurements, the processor would need to dedicate
adequate processing power to ADC communications
and power calculations. Even with the processor
primarily dedicated to this function, any interactions
with other devices in the system could delay the
voltage and current measurements reducing power
monitoring accuracy. Adding additional responsibilities
like averaging the system voltage, current, and power,
as well as energy monitoring would start to further
burden the processor with additional functions.
A better way to monitor power is to use a digital
current monitor to handle the mathematical
processing, freeing up the processor to deal with other
system tasks, and alerting the processor if higher level
system actions need to occur. Texas Instruments
provides a wide range of digital power and current
monitors to address this problem. One such power,
current and voltage monitor is the INA233. The
INA233 enables the monitoring of voltage, current,
power, and energy via an I2C, SMBus, PMBus
compatible interface. A typical application and block
diagram of the INA233 is shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1. INA233 Typical Application Circuit
A simplified block diagram of the power conversion
engine is shown in Figure 2. Power is internally
calculated from the shunt and bus voltage
measurements in an interleaved fashion to minimize
time alignment errors in the power calculation.
Figure 2. INA233 Power Conversion Engine
The internal calculations for power are done in the
background independent of ADC conversion rates or
digital bus communications. The device also features
an ALERT pin that will notify the host processor if the
current, power, or bus voltage is out of the expected
range of operation. In the INA233, fault events are
handled independently, such that multiple
simultaneous fault conditions can be reported by
reading internal status registers when the ALERT pin
asserts. The internal processing and alert capabilities
of the INA233 free the host processor to manage other
tasks while the device takes care of continually
monitoring the system. The host processor is notified
via the ALERT pin only when additional attention is
needed.
The INA233 also features a 24-bit power accumulator
that continuously adds the current power reading to
the sum of previous power readings. The power
accumulator can be used to monitor system energy
consumption to get an average measurement of the
power consumption overtime. Since power levels can
fluctuate during any given instant in time, monitoring
the energy provides a better way to gauge the average

--- PAGE 2 ---
n
i
i 1
ADCPowerMeasurment
Average Power = 
n
Total Accumulated Power over n samples
Number of samples
 ¦
10 V/div
m
Number of Conversions
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Conversion Time: 140 s
m
Conversion Time: 1.1ms
Conversion Time: 8.244ms


n
i
i 1
Energy =  Average Power 
 time 
ADCPowerMeasurment
  = 
 
 n 
 ADC conversion time
n
 Total Accumulated Power 
 ADC conversion time
 
u
§
·
¨
¸
¨
¸ u
u
¨
¸
¨
¸
¨
¸
©
¹
u
¦
www.ti.com
2
SBOA194–April 2017
Submit Documentation Feedback
Copyright © 2017, Texas Instruments Incorporated
Power and Energy Monitoring with Digital Current Sensors Dennis Hudgins
system power usage over long time intervals. Knowing
the system energy consumption provides a metric to
gauge system runtime and power efficiency, as well as
the effects of power optimizations involving adjustment
of power supply voltages and processor clock rates.
The ADC conversion times for both shunt and bus
voltage measurements are programmable from 140 µs
to 8.244 ms. Longer conversion times are useful to
decrease noise susceptibility and to achieve increased
stability in device measurements. The effects of
increased ADC conversion times measurements
results is shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3. Noise vs. ADC Conversion Time
In addition to programmable ADC conversion times,
the device can average up to 1024 conversion cycles
and update the internal power, current, and voltage
registers once the averaging is finished.
Programmable conversion times along with averaging
windows allow the device telemetry update rate to be
adjusted to meet system timing needs.
Even though the INA233 has built in averaging and
adjustable ADC conversion times, the user has to wait
until the averaging is complete before getting the
result. One benefit of the internal power accumulator is
that it allows the host to calculate the average power
on demand, eliminating the otherwise delay for the
averaging interval to finish. Getting an average power
reading on demand is achieved by taking the value of
the total accumulated power and dividing by the total
sample count for that accumulation period as shown in
Equation 1.
(1)
Once the average power is calculated, the energy
consumption is determined by multiplying the average
power by the time interval of that average or by
multiplying the total accumulated power by the ADC
conversion time as shown in Equation 2.
(2)
Since the ADC conversion time can vary by as much
as 10%, it is recommended to multiply the average
power by the time measured by an external time base.
The time interval for the energy calculation should be
long enough so that the communications time due to
the digital bus is insignificant to the total time used in
the energy calculation.
The size of the power accumulator in the INA233 is
limited to 24 bits. The value of the accumulator should
be read periodically and cleared by the host to avoid
overflow. The accumulator can be configured to be
automatically cleared after each read. The time to
overflow will be a function of the power, ADC
conversion times and averaging times. Higher power
levels will cause any overflow in the power
accumulator to occur faster than lower power levels.
Also, longer conversion times and higher number of
averages will increase the time to overflow; in lower
power cases, the time to overflow can be extended to
be several hours up to days in length.
The INA233 is one of many digital current monitors
offered by Texas Instruments. Table 1 shows some
alternative devices that can be used to monitor a
system and help free the host processor to handle
higher level tasks.
Table 1. Alternative Device Recommendations
Device
Optimized Parameters
Performance Trade-Off
INA226
I2C/SMBus compatible
with reduced register set
No Power Accumulator,
no independent fault
monitoring
INA231
WCSP package, reduced
register set, lower cost
Less accuracy, no power
accumulator, no
independent fault
monitoring.
INA219
Lowest Cost, reduced
register set
Less accuracy and
resolution, no ALERT, No
power accumulator
INA3221
Monitors 3 channels
Less accuracy and
resolution, monitors bus
and shunt voltages
Table 2. Adjacent Tech Notes
SBOA179
Integrated, Current Sensing Analog-to-
Digital Converter

--- PAGE 3 ---
IMPORTANT NOTICE AND DISCLAIMER
TI PROVIDES TECHNICAL AND RELIABILITY DATA (INCLUDING DATASHEETS), DESIGN RESOURCES (INCLUDING REFERENCE 
DESIGNS), APPLICATION OR OTHER DESIGN ADVICE, WEB TOOLS, SAFETY INFORMATION, AND OTHER RESOURCES “AS IS” 
AND WITH ALL FAULTS, AND DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS AND IMPLIED, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION ANY 
IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR NON-INFRINGEMENT OF THIRD 
PARTY INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS.
These resources are intended for skilled developers designing with TI products. You are solely responsible for (1) selecting the appropriate 
TI products for your application, (2) designing, validating and testing your application, and (3) ensuring your application meets applicable 
standards, and any other safety, security, or other requirements. These resources are subject to change without notice. TI grants you 
permission to use these resources only for development of an application that uses the TI products described in the resource. Other 
reproduction and display of these resources is prohibited. No license is granted to any other TI intellectual property right or to any third 
party intellectual property right. TI disclaims responsibility for, and you will fully indemnify TI and its representatives against, any claims, 
damages, costs, losses, and liabilities arising out of your use of these resources.
TI’s products are provided subject to TI’s Terms of Sale (www.ti.com/legal/termsofsale.html) or other applicable terms available either on 
ti.com or provided in conjunction with such TI products. TI’s provision of these resources does not expand or otherwise alter TI’s applicable 
warranties or warranty disclaimers for TI products.
Mailing Address: Texas Instruments, Post Office Box 655303, Dallas, Texas 75265
Copyright © 2020, Texas Instruments Incorporated
