=== SOURCE: current_sensing_application.pdf ===
=== PAGES: 4 ===


--- PAGE 1 ---
Application Brief
Current Sensing Applications in Communication 
Infrastructure Equipment
In this article, a fresh look is taken into the 
major electronic end equipment for cellular wireless 
infrastructure (WI) from the perspective of current 
sensing (CS). Several types of CS applications in 
such equipment are reviewed.
Current Sensing in Power Supply Block
As shown in Figure 1, the power supply for the 
WI equipment comes from the utility grid, solar 
energy, or sometimes a combination of the two. The 
power supply is often backed up with battery storage 
for uninterrupted service during a power outage, 
especially in remote areas where solely depending on 
grid electricity is not an option due to limitations from 
physical accessibility or economic feasibility.
AC/DC
DCDC Charger
Load
Figure 1. WI Power Supply Block Diagram
The power supply block can be either integrated 
into the WI end equipment, or can be stand-
alone. Regardless of the implementation, a common 
requirement is an intelligent power management 
system to charge batteries and provide seamless 
transitions between power sources. Current and 
voltage sensing is an indispensable function in such 
power management systems.
Current sensing can be implemented either on the 
high side or on the low side. Dedicated high-voltage, 
shunt-based, Current Sense Amplifiers (CSA) such as 
the INA240 or INA241A are often required for fault 
to ground prevention. Magnetic current sensors such 
as the TMCS1123 or TMCS1101 are both options 
for high-voltage applications due to their inherent 
galvanic isolation. The TMCS1123 provides ambient 
field rejection, fast overcurrent detection, and is 
capable of 75ARMS of continuous current flow perfect 
for incoming grid or solar power.
Current Sensing at Point Of Load
The typical WI electronic system is powered from a 
DC bus, such as 12 V to 48 V. Lower supply rails are 
derived from the bus voltage.
These lower voltage rails are called point-of-load 
(POL) supplies, stemming from the fact that these 
rails satisfy a set of specific requirements and are 
typically located in the vicinity of the supported 
loads. Depending on how critical or informative 
the measurements are, monitoring the current or 
voltage in one or more of these POL supplies is 
recommended. The main requirements for the CSA 
in this situation can include (among others) accuracy, 
speed, dynamic range, and power dissipation by the 
associated shunt resistor.
CSA
VDD
Point of Load
CSA
High Side I-Sense
Low Side I-Sense
Figure 2. Point of Load Current Sensing Options
As shown in Figure 2, current can be sensed at either 
side of the load, with analog or digital CSA, and 
through either external or integrated shunt resistors.
CSA comes with a matched resistor gain network that 
provides value in terms of cost, board space, and 
performance. Most CSAs feature fixed-gain, ranging 
from 10 to 1000. Some CSAs offer configurable 
gain. For example, the INA225 has configurable gain 
through two digital control pins, while other CSAs 
have a gain that is configurable through an external 
resistor, such as INA139.
System integration is further improved when a 
selected CSA that comes with integrated analog 
to digital conversion (ADC) and a shunt resistor. 
EZShunt™ Technology integrates the shunt resistor 
into the leadframe of the device, that generally 
reduces the overall form factor of the current sensing 
www.ti.com
SBOA366C – DECEMBER 2020 – REVISED AUGUST 2023
Submit Document Feedback
Current Sensing Applications in Communication Infrastructure Equipment
1
Copyright © 2023 Texas Instruments Incorporated

--- PAGE 2 ---
circuit. The INA700 is an ultra-small wafer chip scale 
digital power monitor with a 40-V common mode 
range and a 2-mΩ leadframe resistance, which makes 
the device 10ARMS capable. The INA780A is a slightly 
larger EZShunt™ product offered in a QFN package 
with a 85-V common-mode range and a 400-μΩ 
leadframe resistance, making the device 75ARMS 
capable.
The key considerations in selecting a CSA and 
associated shunt resistor for POL measurement starts 
with common-mode voltage, current range, accuracy, 
and speed. In addition, if overcurrent protection (OCP) 
is required, a CSA with an integrated fast-action 
comparator is often the best choice, where system 
parameters such as offset and propagation delay are 
specified. Compared with discrete components, such 
a CSA helps remove uncertainties and as a result, 
simplifies the design.
To monitor multiple POLs, a multichannel CSA such 
as the INA4290 or INA4180 can make sense, since 
these amplifiers offer four channels of analog output. 
When a microcontroller or FPGA is present in the 
equipment, an ADC channel is typically available, as 
well as a digital bus such as I2C. In this situation, an 
analog or digital output CSA can be implemented as 
a POL monitor. A multichannel digital monitor such as 
the INA3221 is another option that frees up controller 
ADC channels while taking advantage of an existing 
I2C bus. This device offers a number of warning and 
alert signals for fast action in case of a fault, as 
well as current, voltage, or power information of three 
independent channels.
Current Sensing in Power Amplifiers
The bias current in power amplifiers (PA) is adjusted 
to meet the need of an end application, modulation 
scheme, and operation class. A typical PA with 
current sensing is shown in Figure 3.
The PA is often constructed with silicon LDMOS 
or GaN technology. Current sensing is important in 
PA applications, both from the standpoint of the 
PA operation and from the standpoint of overall 
energy efficiency management. Under the same bias 
voltage, the PA bias current differs due to device 
variation. Further, the bias current changes with 
temperature. Consequently, for the PA controller to 
accurately control the bias current, both the current 
and temperature information must be available. The 
bias current information is required in improving 
system efficiency, where approximately 50% of total 
system power is consumed by the PA itself.
Integrated power amplifier monitor and control 
systems, such as the AMC7836, can simplify PA 
circuit design. As mentioned, due to natural device 
variation, knowing gate voltage alone is sometimes 
not sufficient to achieve accurate bias current control. 
When current sensing is required in the control loop, 
a separate high-voltage CSA (such as the INA290 or 
INA281) can be used.
Power amplifier monitor and control systems such 
as the AMC7834 are another option with integrated 
current sensing capability. Such a design offers the 
possibility of further reducing board space.
Current/Voltage/Power/
Energy Sense
RF Input
Temperature Sense
 PA Controller 
(w/uC or FPGA)
ADC
DAC
VDD
d
s
g
Figure 3. PA Biasing and Current Sensing
Alternate Device Recommendations
TI offers a complete line of CSA and magnetic 
sensors that serve in WI end equipment, from 
high-voltage supply current and PA current sensing 
to general purpose POL current monitoring. The 
high-voltage INA310A also comes with integrated 
comparator and reference output to facilitate the 
OCP requirement. For applications where excellent 
accuracy is required, the INA190 family of devices 
are options with nA input bias current. These devices 
are essential in situations where the sensed current 
is small. Some of these devices come with Enable 
pins for further power reduction; some are offered 
in a WCSP package for board space optimization. 
For applications with lower common mode voltage 
requirements, the INA180 offers speed and overall 
performance value. The INA301 family of devices 
features integrated fast comparators and high-speed 
amplifiers. Both outputs that are available that meet 
the requirements of OCP.
Table 1. Alternate Device Recommendations
Device
Characteristics
INA310A
Common mode range -4 V to 110 V; 
comparator
INA180
Low IQ; High bandwidth
INA190
Low IQ; Low IB; enable pin
INA301
High bandwidth amplifier; fast comparator
www.ti.com
2
Current Sensing Applications in Communication Infrastructure Equipment
SBOA366C – DECEMBER 2020 – REVISED AUGUST 2023
Submit Document Feedback
Copyright © 2023 Texas Instruments Incorporated

--- PAGE 3 ---
Related Documentation
1.
Texas Instruments, Hybrid Battery Charger With Load Control for Telecom Equipment, application note.
2.
Texas Instruments, Precision Current Measurements on High-Voltage Power Supply Rails, application brief.
3.
Texas Instruments, Common Uses for Multichannel Current Monitoring
www.ti.com
SBOA366C – DECEMBER 2020 – REVISED AUGUST 2023
Submit Document Feedback
Current Sensing Applications in Communication Infrastructure Equipment
3
Copyright © 2023 Texas Instruments Incorporated

--- PAGE 4 ---
IMPORTANT NOTICE AND DISCLAIMER
TI PROVIDES TECHNICAL AND RELIABILITY DATA (INCLUDING DATA SHEETS), DESIGN RESOURCES (INCLUDING REFERENCE 
DESIGNS), APPLICATION OR OTHER DESIGN ADVICE, WEB TOOLS, SAFETY INFORMATION, AND OTHER RESOURCES “AS IS” 
AND WITH ALL FAULTS, AND DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS AND IMPLIED, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION ANY 
IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR NON-INFRINGEMENT OF THIRD 
PARTY INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS.
These resources are intended for skilled developers designing with TI products. You are solely responsible for (1) selecting the appropriate 
TI products for your application, (2) designing, validating and testing your application, and (3) ensuring your application meets applicable 
standards, and any other safety, security, regulatory or other requirements.
These resources are subject to change without notice. TI grants you permission to use these resources only for development of an 
application that uses the TI products described in the resource. Other reproduction and display of these resources is prohibited. No license 
is granted to any other TI intellectual property right or to any third party intellectual property right. TI disclaims responsibility for, and you 
will fully indemnify TI and its representatives against, any claims, damages, costs, losses, and liabilities arising out of your use of these 
resources.
TI’s products are provided subject to TI’s Terms of Sale or other applicable terms available either on ti.com or provided in conjunction with 
such TI products. TI’s provision of these resources does not expand or otherwise alter TI’s applicable warranties or warranty disclaimers for 
TI products.
TI objects to and rejects any additional or different terms you may have proposed. IMPORTANT NOTICE
Mailing Address: Texas Instruments, Post Office Box 655303, Dallas, Texas 75265
Copyright © 2023, Texas Instruments Incorporated
